---
layout: post
title:  "I Still Believe in Lance Armstrong"
date: 2013-12-28
categories: posts
---

I still believe in Lance Armstrong. 

Yep, you read that right. You’re probably already loading up your potato cannon
with rotten vegetables, getting ready to paint me red with tomato juice. And
that’s fine, I understand that and I like tomato juice anyway. But before you
shoot that thing at me please just finish this article. Because it’s not really
even about Lance Armstrong; it’s about not judging someone by a headline and
about believing in people even when they make terrible mistakes. Maybe you
haven’t been shooting up on every performance enhancing drug you can get your
hands on and making millions of dollars by lying about it, but if you think that
makes you a better person then Lance Armstrong, this article is going to
challenge you to reconsider.

What kind of mistakes have you made in your life? Personally, most of the
mistakes I’ve made in the past seem pretty inevitable. Like the time at recess
in 2nd grade when I beat up a kid because my friend told me to. Seems ridiculous
now, but at the time I’d been watching some violent movies and hanging around
some violent friends and it seemed like the right thing to do. My environment
had twisted my morals.

The mistakes Lance Armstrong has made are a long shot from beating someone up in
2nd grade. As a grown man, he has a responsibility to build and maintain strong
moral principles, and he should be held accountable for his actions. But the
circumstances he was under are also a lot more severe than the circumstances I
was under in 2nd grade. Imagine going to recess and having everyone just beating
each other up. Yeah sure it’s against the rules, but the recess duty isn’t
paying attention or doing anything about it. Plus, the people who beat the most
people up are getting rewarded with popularity and even some cash prizes! Maybe
you’re not into beating people up and you’ll be happy to abstain, but the kids
who love to roughhouse are going to have a lot of trouble convincing themselves
to stay out of it. 

Try and put yourself in Lance Armstrong’s shoes for a minute. You’re an
extremely driven young man, determined to prove yourself. You’re also insanely
competitive and you would be willing to saw your kneecaps off with a rusty
butter knife (as [Johnathan
Vaughters](http://www.cyclingnews.com/blogs/jonathan-vaughters/opinion-its-not-all-about-lance-armstrong-and-heres-how-we-can-fight-doping)
put it) if you thought that would improve your chances of winning. So you’re
working your ass off to be successful as a professional cyclist, but one day you
find yourself in an environment where all the successful people are doping. What
are you going to do? This is precisely the situation Levi Leipheimer found
himself in, which he wrote about when he publicly confessed to doping.

<blockquote>
<p>
Until recently—or maybe even until today—when people thought about doping, they
thought about a guy, by himself, using banned substances to get ahead. What
people didn't realize—what I didn't realize until after I was already committed
to this career—was that doping was organized and everywhere in the peloton.
Doping wasn't the exception, it was the norm.
</p>
<p>
<i>When I was a 13-year-old kid, my dream was to ride the Tour de France. I fully
devoted my life to that goal.</i> I left home as a teenager, passed on a college
degree, moved to Europe at 19 and lived in hostels with roommates who didn't
speak my language. 
</p>
<p>
Having made sacrifices for my dream, <i>several years after I turned pro, I came
to see cycling for what it was: a sport where some team managers and doctors
coordinated and facilitated the use of banned substances and methods by their
riders.</i> A sport where the athletes at the highest level—perhaps without
exception—used banned substances. A sport where doping was so accepted that
riders from different teams—who were competitors on the road—coordinated their
doping to keep up with other riders doing the same thing.
</p>
<p>
I regret that this was the state of affairs in the sport that we love and I
chose as my career. I am sorry that I was forced to make the decisions I made. I
admit that I didn’t let doping deter me from my dream. I admit that I used
banned substances. I know that learning this will disappoint many of my fans
and friends and I am sorry that the sport and I have let you down.
</p>
<p>
<i>Right or wrong, in my mind the choice was “do it or go home.” For me that was
not a choice.</i>
</p>
<p>
People will be disappointed and say I was wrong, that I should have chosen
differently, and am just making excuses. I made the decision I made. <i>I don’t
offer this description of the sport as an excuse, simply as an explanation of
the context and reason for my decision.</i> I won’t lie about it—I have to own it—I
accept responsibility for my decision.
</p>
<p>
I could have come forward sooner. But would that have accomplished
anything—other than to end my career? One rider coming forward and telling his
story in the face of cycling’s code of silence would not have fixed a problem
that was institutional.
<a href="http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10000872396390444799904578048672603746526">[WSJ]</a>
</p>
</blockquote>

Alright, enough about professional cycling and 2nd grade recess. The point I’m
trying to make here is that the people that make the worst mistakes are often
the people who are in the worst situations. These people are often the victims
just as much as they are the perpetrators. But these people are so easy to
blame, and that’s exactly what the world does.

Think about how the media portrays criminals. The headlines and the focus of the
stories is on the things they’ve done wrong, not on what may have brought them
to commit the crime. I’m not blaming the media for this—it would be pretty
unrealistic to expect much more—but overtime I think this approach desensitizes
people.

Take Compton for example. If you hear about people shooting each other in
Compton enough times on the news, then you’re probably going to start thinking
Compton must just be full of bad people.  You start to think about how different
the people in Compton must be from you, and how you are such a good person for
not shooting anyone on your way to work this morning. You might stop caring
about the people of Compton, maybe you even wish all those people would just
disappear and stop causing so many problems for the world. But it’s not like
everyone born in Compton is born a bad person. They just grow up in a difficult
environment and it shapes their decisions.

I’m not saying these people shouldn’t be held accountable and punished for their
crimes. What I am saying is that as individuals, we can do a better job of
trying to understand each other’s mistakes. Hating someone for making a mistake
or doing something you disagree with isn’t going to help anything. What will
help is showing compassion and trying to figure out what led them to do it. The
focus needs to be on the underlying causes, not the individual or the outcome.

It’s so easy to hate Lance Armstrong right now. He was my hero and he let me
down big time. My favorite Lance Armstrong quote used to be: 

<blockquote>
<p>
“Everyone wants to know what I’m on. What am I on? I’m on my bike, busting my
ass 6 hours a day. What are you on?”
<a href="http://youtu.be/MIl5RxhLZ5U">[YouTube]</a>
</p>
</blockquote>

It took me a long time to believe he had been lying and to come to terms with
the fact that he had cheated. I still can’t even begin to understand how he
brought himself to threaten and sue people who told the truth about him. But
that doesn’t matter, what matters is that I’m not going to just give up on him.
I’m going to keep working to understand him with the hope of someday being able
to forgive him.
