---
layout: post
title:  "Dirable"
date: 2018-02-10
snippet: "An ActiveRecord inspired library for persisting objects straight to the filesystem."
categories: posts
---


ActiveRecord is great! There's something deeply satisfying about typing
`User.all` and having that just pull all the users from a database. Or
typing `user.phone_number = "555-5555"` and `user.save` to update a users
phone number in the database.

But what if you don't even want a database? What if you'd rather just stick all
your juicy data right in plain old files and directories, where anyone can
easily browse and update it? Then you don't even need a web server with
routes and controllers and views! People can just use a file browser to do all
that.  Want a list of users? Easy, that's just `ls users`. Want a list of user
phone numbers? That's gonna be `cat users/*/phone_number`. Want to update a
phone number? Easy peasy, just do `echo 555-5555 >>
users/gertrude/phone_number`. Slick!

Or at least that was the idea that inspired `Dirable`. It allowed me to quickly
bootstrap a Ruby application that just needed to move some files around and
keep track of some state alongside them. I also wanted people to be able to
access and update the state manually but it felt overkill to setup a
database and a web interface just for that purpose.

Check out the code on [GitHub](https://github.com/chipjacks/dirable)! Its
designed so that you can easily plug in your own Ruby class to talk to a remote
filesystem such as HDFS or S3 or whatever your heart may desire!
